[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with a face
that i think everybody is going to
recognize mr matthew mcconaughey thank
you for joining me man
all right good to be here tom thanks for
having me absolutely dude i am super
excited your book was so much fun and i
listened to the audiobook so i got to
hear you performing it and okay doing
impressions and voices um i was really
into it i actually had sat down at one
point i was just gonna do like a quick
15 minutes and then i had
other things that i had planned to do
sort of in a different sequence and the
book sucked me in and i ended up reading
it listening to it in almost one shot it
was
really fantastic
thank you thank you thank you absolutely
man i love that you've gotten into
what i would refer to as the mindset
space just you know walking people
through what you've learned over a
pretty extraordinary life and career
what was the the origin behind wanting
to write the book
i had been threatening to go away and
see if those 36 years of diaries were
worthy of putting into book form i've
been threatening myself to do that for
15 years
never had the courage to do it figured
oh you know what in martyrdom my wife or
a good friend will look at those diaries
and journals and if anything's worth
sharing they'll share it and that was
sort of a [__] i was sort of chickening
out with that idea
um so maybe it was coming on 50 although
i'm not a sort of a numerologist where i
think like oh i've got to do things by a
certain time but maybe that had
something to do with it um i hired a
ghostwriter first
to help me we had one meeting and then
he got pulled from the job by his boss
and that was the best gift i could have
been given that was when i said oh okay
you need to go away and my wife backed
me up said yes get out of here take that
treasure chest full of journals and go
see what you got i feel like i had
enough i didn't know what it was what it
was going to be i actually thought it
was going to be much more academic than
maybe it ended up being
and early on in the writing process i
remember i had to pull back and go just
look at what you have and let it reveal
itself and what revealed itself was
stories people places prescriptions
poems prayers and a whole lot of bumper
stickers so there are my seven stacks
and then the central thing that came out
of those was the title of the book green
lights
now one of the um i don't know if you'd
call it a bumper sticker or a
prescription but one of the things that
you quote pretty early on in the book
and seem to inform a lot of
um the
the core thesis of the book is the gore
vidal quote
which is
style is knowing who you are what you
have to say and not giving a damn
and uh i thought that was really
fantastic and when i think about
somebody having this sort of it factor
that makes an actor memorable uh and
allows them to stick with people i mean
you know starting as sort of a
completely unknown kid working in a bar
where a producer happened to come
through
um and i think about how you translate
that you you go into detail about why
that quote impacted you so much what is
it about that quote and the idea of
knowing yourself that you found so
useful
well
what better
subject to study
than ourselves what better
subject to interrogate and investigate
daily what
what's the one character that we are
never gonna get
that we should never get bored with
chasing to figure out
but also
what's the one it's also the one
character that we can't get away from
ourselves it's the one person that we
can't get rid of so i have enjoyed and
not enjoyed
investigating myself through
through my life
i write about this in the book i don't
you know to form a personal style or to
know who we are or what we want that's
hard to do
so
i have learned to by process of
elimination get rid of the things you go
well that is not me
or that is just a fad
that's not going to ever be classic that
go that does not feed me um that may be
for instance there are certain pursuits
we go yeah that may be an immediate
green light that's just plugged into a
battery
but that that that light's going to go
out because that battery's going to die
that's not truly uh solar powered green
light so how to style is finding those
things where we go oh that's a
solar-powered green light that's that's
who i am and who i am not so we figured
out who were not first i found that i
was able to figure out who i was
uh by process of elimination um it's
also you know
i'd rather be a good man than a nice guy
that that that that that happens later
and that that come that's part of style
you know i i've always said this i'm i
i'd rather have an [__] than a dork
why because at least i know where the
[__] stands
the dork's trying to be everything to
everybody that he thinks they want them
to be
i don't want to be that i don't i don't
really enjoy being around that person
because i can't trust him um and when
i've been one i couldn't trust myself
so style is also about you know once you
do
find your frequency on something it go
forward if you're a non-tyrant and don't
ask permission and that's the not giving
a damn part i've found that the world
will actually acquiesce and go yep i'll
give you a green on that green light on
that if you actually go forward and mean
it like you're and you're going to do it
by hook or by crook and not ask
permission
yeah there's several stories in the book
about you not asking permission whether
it's um
stealing the lumber to build the
treehouse which is a lot of fun
and then one thing that i really liked
was when you first came to hollywood and
you were staying with a producer and he
basically said man you you seem like you
need a job and if you seem like you need
a job you're never going to get one and
there's there's something about breaking
into hollywood that seems like the most
sort of psychological break-in where
everything else is it's more of a skill
right can you do the
accounting better you can get a job in
accounting but it really is an
intangible thing to breaking into
hollywood where people want to watch you
there's just something where
the fact that this guy recognized that
after spending a night with you in a bar
i think it was in a cab ride home or
something where he says hey you ever
thought about acting yeah
talk to me about cultivating that the
the i don't give a damn part and how
that trip riding motorcycles in sweden
or wherever it was ended up being
exactly what you needed
so i move out to
hollywood i've just i did days confused
the summer of 92. i go back and graduate
from university of texas at austin in 93
i do a
quick stint in this texas chainsaw
massacre film and then i drive out with
my u-haul in two thousand bucks to sleep
on the couch of that guy that i met in
the bar two years prior
um who got who cast me my first job
two thousand dollars i know i'm sleeping
on his couch not paying rent two
thousand dollars gonna go pretty quickly
and i'm starting to after about two
weeks i'm going a dime and i need to
could you give me a meeting with an
asian man i need to get an agent i need
a job and he snaps at me and as you read
the book cusses me out and tells me look
this town smells needy you're done
you what you need to do is get the hell
out of here and go do something with
your buds and forget about hollywood and
what you think you need
anyway i did i took off with my two
buddies with what little money we had
and we
motorcycled through europe for six weeks
well by the time i got back
i forgot all about
needing an agent or oh i need to get a
part i just had great life experience
for six weeks and so
he then brings it up about a week after
i'm back and goes you're ready i go for
what and he goes tomorrow morning we got
the meeting with the agent i'm like oh
great
he was right on the money because i was
able to go into that
meeting and be myself be involved in
that meeting and not be so impressed
that i got that meeting i talk about
that in the book less impressed more
involved um
you know
it's a trick but it works in our life i
mean sometimes
if something is number one on our list
and we've got to have it oh we need it
we need
a lot of times we don't get it think
about it whether it's that girl or
whether it's that friend or whatever it
is man if you make them the number one
thing in your life they kind of go like
well what else did you have going before
you you came to me you know what i mean
i want somebody who had their [__]
together before they came came to me a
little bit if i'm your everything then
i'm probably a lot of times people go or
situations will say no we don't want you
because you need us too bad
um
something about taking that trip to
germany got that need out of my mind and
the idea of getting a a job or an agent
in hollywood became subliminally number
two
on my list of priorities just by sure
that i kind of forgotten about it it
wasn't
thinking about it all the time well that
allowed me to relax be involved in a
meeting with an agent where they
accepted me to then go out on auditions
and actually get them because i was like
i really want this
but i don't need it and there's a very
there's a big difference and hollywood
is is
in fame there's a game in hollywood it
is an affair it's not necessarily a
marriage um and there's a game to play
and it's better to be better to want it
and not need it
yeah the the idea of confidence
you've got the southern charm there's no
question and i'm sure
you have a certain level of awareness
about that you know one thing that i
find so interesting about actors
is they're so good at conveying emotion
they understand how they're coming
across i mean that level of
self-awareness is obviously part of
their power
when you think about developing
self-awareness and translating that into
confidence
is that tied to how much preparation you
do
you know how do you begin to in your
early twenties have the kind of
confidence where you can walk in with a
swagger not need it um and and you know
captivate people like that
well i mean i've always been
very intentional i i will say this
part of it
is don't
worry don't give a damn about the
awareness don't get objective don't hop
out of yourself and say how am i being
received early
the best work i've done
and i am very aware of that but then the
best work i've done in my career is when
my head's down in the process and it is
completely a subjective experience and i
don't give a damn what you think about
it or what anyone else thinks about it
and i sure as hell don't give a damn
about the result
because i'm in it and i'm so in it that
the last day of shooting
they yell at rap and i go okay i'll see
y'all tomorrow morning for the
tomorrow's work and they go no it it's
over like we finished film shooting rap
there is no tomorrow then i'm like
become objective for the first time so
in many ways and i think especially
today
not just in enacting a career but in all
of our
careers athletes
everything is with so much
room to be objective what are we on our
phone there's a jumbotron immediate
response when we put something out
we may be becoming too objective or
measuring too aware giving too much
credence to awareness of oh how am i
perceived
you know kids these days it's what they
put out
how it's received if it's got enough
thumbs up they have a good day if it's
gotten a thumbs down they have a bad day
so their entire
our being in our attitude and how we
feel about ourselves is more reliant
we're letting it be more reliant on what
other people think about us today than
ever before
isaac leaning to the subjective i don't
give a damn about what anyone else
thinks i've done it but but i'm gonna
chase down and do what's true is to me
and then it's time to pop out sometimes
and
read your reviews or
have a look at the jumbotron or watch
that watch that performance on playback
it's okay but but but if you're thinking
about the result or thinking of in the
third person too early i don't believe
you do near as good or true of a job
in the first person subjectively that
you could do
yeah your um your approach i find very
intriguing in the book you talk about
these walkabouts that you go on
and i i love that there seems to be a
process to what you do versus like if
everything just came easily to you it
would be far less interesting and far
less instructive but in the book it's i
was trying to explain this to my wife
and sister and i was saying you've got
to read this book like it's actually
really fascinating to hear how he
has ends up having a wet dream that
sends him to south america to float
naked in the amazon river
and
in that moment be you know has these
realizations that he crystallizes in
this journal and then he comes back and
actually
lives them and that like when i think
about people trying to come up with
their identity trying to create the
space to figure out who they are who
they're not to your point but they're
they're they're trying to figure that
out they don't know how to create that
space
what the the walkabouts the driving
around the in your 20s you could have
just posted up in hollywood and gotten
laid day after day of the day so the
fact that you were driving around the
u.s floating in the amazon like
what's the intention behind that
yeah well
look after that year that i had in
australia where i was
tell people that story a little quickly
that
was absolutely [__] hilarious man
i'm glad you found it funny i think it's
hilarious it's a black comedy so
so i graduate high school
longview texas now in my family which is
a high disciplined family once you turn
poo freedom no curfew if you hadn't
learned it yet you're not gonna learn it
well i've just graduated high school i
got 45 bucks in my pocket from a job i
got i got a four handicap i've just made
two holes and ones 11 days apart last
month
i got the best i'm taking the best of
the girl in my school and across town
i've made straight a's so mom and dad
are super happy i got a car that's paid
for and i got no curfew and right out of
that
i decide i'm gonna go away to
australia to be an exchange student it
was australia or sweden and i remember
writing down my 18 year old mine sunny
beaches l mcpherson english speaking
australia so i head off to australia um
and i'm told by this family that i'm
gonna live with
we live here it's a beautiful place we
live on the outskirts of sydney you're
gonna love it
well very quickly
after i meet this family and
three hour drive out of sydney which is
a bit of an exaggeration of what the
outskirts are we arrive at this little
small
home in the middle of the country
outside of the town that was population
305.
um definitely not what i thought of the
outskirts of sydney l mcpherson was
probably going to be nowhere close
unless she was running across the the
the ranch land out there and there were
no beaches in sight
um they did speak english so so one out
of three
anyway that
year there uh
was a trying one for me where i had to
find my identity and was forced to go
introspective i had ran across some very
odd dealings and
what was valuable about the year is
remember where i was coming from
all the green lights i was catching
rolling well all of a sudden that was a
screeching red light halt i had no car
i had no money
i had no girlfriend i had no buddies i
had no golf clubs i did have a curfew
and i just had nobody i could question
so i started writing and
writing letters and a lot of people
wouldn't return those letters because
those letters i understand they were
getting very heady
and they were long
and they were laborious letters to
whoever was reading them on the other
end of the line so i began writing
letters to myself and then i'd write a
letter back to myself well
i won't give you all the details but i
decided to create resistance in my life
things that i can overcome daily
basically i didn't know it then but i
was just just to keep my insanity
sometimes when we're lost and we're like
i don't know what the hell is going on
in life for me i began running six miles
a day i decided to become celibate for
the entire year i become a vegetarian um
i'm you know i'm convinced my my calling
is to go to south africa after this and
help free nelson mandela so when i'd run
that six miles a day when i would stay
celibate when i would uh um
you know eat my head of iceberg lettuce
with ketchup on it because i was a
vegetarian these were little things that
i could achieve in the day to give me
some force of okay i did that gave me
some sort of sanity but not too is it
partly about control like that's that's
a lot of
sort of self-denial it's interesting
that you chose high discipline things
yes well
you know trust i mean there was a run in
there where
on friday nights with one bar in town i
would go out and drink a hell of a lot
more than i probably should have just to
escape it
you know what i mean but during the week
i needed these little things to go okay
i can check that off my list because the
rest of my life in my is anarchy right
now
and i don't know who to trust what to
believe what matters this is weird i
think what's going on i needed a few
things like going okay you ran six miles
check okay you didn't eat meat again you
ate less check
you were celibate again check i needed
these little these restrictions to give
me some form or give me some sense of
structure where i could just feel my
feet on the ground and go i'm holding my
head above water going through this time
but at least i know what rope to hold on
to and it's these disciplines that i put
in front of myself
um anyway the year
was wild in kearney and a year though
that in hindsight i would not be sitting
here talking to you with the life i have
if i did not have that year
because
i learned to
stick with myself i learned i was never
going to pull the parachute and say i'm
going back home why not wild
well i've given a handshake deal on it
and
just a handshake deal meant that much to
you but a handshake deal meant that much
and admit that much to my father and the
fact that in
my gut
in it when you know at even even at 5 30
when i would leave the dinner table to
go back for my nightly ritual
and i'd go back and i'd write and do
these things
um
even then
in my gut i always had a hunch that wait
a minute
you finish this out you finish it out
there's light on the other end of this
top there's something you're supposed to
learn
mcconaughey i would tell myself there's
some there's a golden lesson in here you
don't know what it is but if you stick
to it the lesson will be even more
worthy the longer you pay your penance
so i saw it as a penance i didn't know
what the answer was going to be
um but it the answer was was was
incredible like i said i wouldn't be
here now without that time i've been it
helped me deal with other crises after
that which i just didn't even give those
crises as credit because they were
nothing compared to what i just gone
through um so i had callous skin in a
way
and it helped me that's when i really
began writing in earnest
that's when i really came to know myself
because i had to rely only on myself for
the decisions and what reality was and
wasn't um
and so i came in that's where i got a
great identity and so if i wouldn't have
had that year for instance
maybe i would have gone to hollywood and
not been able to take those walkabouts
when i needed to find my balance maybe i
would have
not known hey you need to go off and be
with yourself you need to go through
some uncomfortable times with yourself
to come out the other side
which
always happened for me when i did take
those walkabouts i did come out the
other side shaking hands with myself and
going hey
it's you and you you're the only person
i can't get rid of so let's figure out
how to get along here so those trips
away on my own after the australian trip
are always about let's go figure out
matthew what we're going to forgive
and what we're going to say enough's
enough about and that would the first 10
days of those trips on my own have
always been
hell
they were they were not not i did not
enjoy the company and the company was me
until i got on the other side and um
you know after about usually around day
10 i figure out what i'm going to
forgive what i'm not going to put up
with anymore and then we move on and
then all of a sudden i'm enjoying my
company and i'm having a good time and
i'm present again
recalibrate
there's a a subtle thing that's
happening there that i hope people take
away which is
you knew that there is something to be
extracted from living life so you know
whether you would agree with a statement
that there's power in loneliness
certainly you were creating situations
from which you had the frame of
reference i can extract value from this
how did you get that frame of reference
like that's so useful but i don't think
most people have that
you know i don't know exactly where
where i got it i mean i would say again
to call back that australian year where
i did not have a choice
where i was forced into that situation
and saw the green light assets from
being alone and quite lonely um
i do think uh that there's great value
in being alone and if we are alone and
we get bored
and we don't like the company
ding may that light go off to say that
does not mean
we need to pick up our phone to get some
attention or go to the bottle to to to
to to ease the anxiety or
go online to get some feedback to
entertain ourselves no it's actually a
great time to say no
sit here in that discomfort
long enough to go
okay
until you come out the other side to go
all right i'm good with me again
now it's it's part of that i write about
when i'm about traveling in general
ideally you don't go to a place you
don't i always say that don't i don't
want to leave a place i travel to
until i get to the point of going ah i
could live here this could be my
existence as soon as i get to that point
then i'm like okay you go
now i can go that's the same thing in
the personal journeys
stick with it till you get through the
discomfortable to uncomfortable times
until you go you know what i can spend
time with myself i could do this i could
do this forever well then it's okay to
go to re-engage pick up your phone go
see your friends go have a drink what
have you go look for those things that
are other relationships in life but
hopefully not until there's great value
in not doing that until you go i'm good
with me and me for right now
that's really interesting given the
context of some of the stories um that
you tell so
you've got the floating down the amazon
river so assuming that that falls into
that same camp of i'm going to be here
in what is obviously very different than
city life that you've been used to i
know you travel to rural africa it
sounded like at one point and have a
pretty interesting uh time there
including a wrestling match uh
which is a phenomenal story um
so when you're there
what you're trying to process through is
the whatever beef you're having with
yourself at that moment or is it
something about a daily life that
involves
activity sweating finding a way without
sort of modern conveniences what what is
the breakthrough it's
the breakthrough is
i mean i didn't i don't go there going
oh i'm gonna
i gotta work something out it's more
about i'm going to put myself in a place
where i'm gonna be forced to work
something out and that goes back to that
place you're talking about that's very
hard to find sometimes we don't know
what it is we're trying to figure out
but can we put ourselves in a place that
may be very uncomfortable where you're
going to go well i'm going to be forced
to
so i go to a place where no one knows my
name does not have any idea that i'm an
actor has never seen my face has no idea
if i'm famous does not speak the same
language which is another thing to force
you on yourself because you're getting a
socratic dialogue because you don't
understand what everyone's talking about
um and you are then forced to have a
dialogue you're forced to put a pen to
paper for your own entertainment
and you're forced to quiet times where
you're sitting there wishing you could
go to sleep
because it feels like it's 10 p.m but
it's actually only 5 p.m and you're like
holy [__] time's moving so slow with
this day hurry up it's uncomfortable
oh okay
10 12 days after that i'm not enjoying
the trip but i know i have a destination
i have a place that i'm going that's 22
days away my flight back is not for
another 22 days so i'm not going
anywhere for 22 days and i've arrived
and say we're on day 10 and i'm going
through hell and not enjoying myself i'm
on the move i do i do recommend do it
doing these things when you can break a
sweat doing them don't go lock yourself
in a room
unless you want to pad the walls and put
on a helmet in the chin strap and a
mouth guard you know what i mean i mean
take a trip mother nature has a big help
it has been for me to go off and then
have a journey oh i gotta each day i
have it's a 14 mile hike to this place i
need to get there
fatigue can be very good for us in that
way and letting relax in our mind and
get some things out
and then after the 12 days
of not enjoying my company that's when i
usually have some sort of purge wake up
and the rest of the trip is just
glorious and that's when the lessons
start to come for me anyway it's that
next
10 days after
i've gone through the the the not
enjoying my own company that's when i
start to that's when my pens to paper
writing
beautiful stuff truisms things that
landed things that i'm learning because
i'm being very present but the first ten
are just the stuff i'm writing in is you
know the the who what where when i who
what where when how and whys you know to
all the questions the the the the mental
almost paralysis well after that becomes
ah now i'm seeing beauty now i'm seeing
poetry in life now i'm seeing how my
actions reverb with with life and it
comes back to me in the same way that i
gave it out then life becomes a dance
and a song
and that's when the trips are beautiful
but only because
i went through the i stuck with the the
early penance of it
and when i wish it i wish i didn't have
to go through that ten days i wish you
could just be like okay i'm here now it
just didn't work that we just never just
seemed to work that way
and when you talk about penance
basically there's
for whatever reason for you for all of
us there's something that's hard that we
have to get through but if we're willing
to do that whether it's sweating whether
it's doing the hard emotional work
that there's some reward on the other
side of that
absolutely there's great value in that
we can deny it i deny it all the time
certain things but i'm sure many of you
i know myself when i keep denying it it
comes out eventually and usually in a
very awkward way
it's sometimes in a public space
where it's like oh
man that bubbled over then i just ah
and and i regret it i'm like you should
have
gone off and dealt with that on your own
before you
went out and said i can try to keep it
at bay knowing because it's going to
come out it will come out it will come
out awkwardly in a relationship you'll
take it out on your your significant
other a friend you'll take it out on a
stranger it'll it'll come out somewhere
in an awkward way and and you regret it
i know i have
do you think that identity is something
that were
you're doing this internal work to
uncover who you are or is there a sense
of creation
uncover or create that's a great
question great concept how much do you
uncover and how much do you create
um
i mean i would have to say my first gut
feeling that those two are part and
parcel
what you're uncovering and because i
mean we all have everything in us
right
we all every human has every
everything that every other human has in
us now we have it to different we have
different innate abilities to different
extents some of us you know
are are born with a higher level of an
innate ability than someone else but
everyone else has some version
of the of the abilities that everyone
else has so i think we are uncovering it
but
let it expose itself but the creating it
is what gives
the uncovering some what we uncover some
form
um
because there's there's there's things
that i've uncovered that i may go oh wow
that i didn't know you had a talent for
that matthew but i don't pursue it so
i'm like going no that's i only need in
my four avenues of the four things that
i'm i want to follow through on in my
life that really doesn't fit in one but
put that on the side as a little hobby
you know maybe you'll go to it just
remember remember that actually you know
what you're pretty good at conducting an
orchestra but i'm not going to be an
orchestral conductor right now for
instance you know what i mean
um
so
it's created it's uncovering but then i
think the creation is where do you
channel it
and i know i'm very intentional i want
to channel
if we can if we can channel our innate a
bit what we do have a great innate
ability with what we're willing to
cultivate work at hustle at
read about learn about keep our eyes
open every day through the world that's
when we can make
uh maybe have a career instead of a job
that's when maybe we can do something
that makes us look forward to mondays
not everybody i don't believe everybody
can do what they love to do if everyone
just did what they love to do we'd have
an extremely high unemployment rate
right
you know what i mean so i have learned
to love some things that i didn't like
doing
um
i have i still do things that i don't
love to do but i know
team me up for more time to do what i
love later
um so
the ideal i think is if you can find
your own innate ability and then educate
and work your butt off to
to learn more about that and if you can
form that into something that is a
demand
if you can make that something you can
supply something to the world that is in
demand
that maybe the world doesn't even know
they're demanding it or should
then
that's the honey hole
we can find that spot one of the things
that i find really inspiring about you
and how you move through the world is is
that degree of intention looking for
those honey spots finding like when you
were sort of burning out on being
the rom-com guy you
went cold turkey on that for 20 months
or whatever before the
next bout of job offers came in and and
now have really reinvented yourself and
obviously stepped into academy
award-winning performances and and that
is really extraordinary when you think
about
creating that in being true to yourself
and taking that risk to step into the
unknown
how do you conceptualize that so many
people get trapped by fame they get
trapped by the success and they're never
able to
um reinvent themselves there's something
heart achingly sad about the person
who's primed past them and they didn't
reinvent themselves
how were you able to do that have a
whole second set of the highest level of
success ever and which gives me the
feeling that you know whether it's
chasing being the ministry of culture or
whatever
whenever you decide that you wanted to
move on beyond acting that you would
just have a whole other thing
um
how did you not get trapped by fame
well
it was hard
because
you know i
so happy to be even have the job i have
it's so so happy
to be doing what i get to do but again
being less impressed and more involved i
had to go wait a minute
this is still very impressive and you
can still be very respectful of the
situation you're in matthew and you're
affluent and you're you know
doing rom-coms and you like doing
rom-coms and i do
and i did
and i was shirtless on the beach and i
was like yes and those rom comments are
paying rent for those houses that i'm
running shirtless on the beach for yes
sir that is i thank you guilty fact
at the same time i was like
i'm not don't feel like i'm growing in
my work
and my life had at that time had become
extremely vital meaning i just had a
newborn son with camilla
wow the only thing i ever knew i wanted
to be and now i was and here's this
job that i have held most revenants for
my like fatherhood now i was
uh i was
though my emotions the ceiling in the
basement of my emotions the range was so
wide i was laughing louder crying harder
getting angry or showing more joy
having more sadness
all across the board all emotions were
much more extreme than they were or
could be in the work because it's a very
compressed emotional ceiling and
basement that is sort of inherent to
rom-coms they have to be buoyant they
have to stay within a certain frequency
and bounce along the clouds if you hang
your hat on humanity or get love as hard
or get as angry as you might in real
life in a rom-com you can sink that ship
and the movie's over you know you don't
in the wrong con the couple doesn't make
it back if you get too mad
or too happy you know what i mean so
i said
your life's more vital than your work
okay well if it's got to be one way the
other
congratulations matthew good but can my
work challenge
the vitality i'm feeling in my life
so
the work i wanted to do i heard certain
scripts i wanted wanted to do dallas
buyers club at that time other scripts
nobody's going to touch me with the
10-foot pole in those movies all the
dramatic roles i wanted they're like no
no not in the kind of we won't finance
it okay so i can't do what i want to do
so i'm going to stop doing what i've
been doing
so i stopped doing rom-coms i said no i
stopped
well if the first six months of not
doing rom-coms i wasn't doing anything
only thing that came in was rom-coms i
said no no no no no finally nothing came
in and for 14 more months nothing came
in i considered other careers
didn't know if it would ever work again
but after 20 months of being gone
unbranding as i now call it being out of
sight not being in your theater or your
living room in a rom-com not seeing me
shirtless on the beach
i became a new good idea
for some of those dramatic roles because
where's he been
i don't know i haven't seen him where
has he been
so
i was kind of refound and looked at in a
different way you know would be an
interesting idea who wouldn't have been
an interesting idea for lincoln lawyer
two years ago but is now
mcconaughey
so
it was a recalibration but it was a long
um branding phase um i i i had to do
that
for myself
i loved doing the rom-coms but i was
getting the scripts i felt like i could
do the same script tomorrow morning and
i was like that's fine but i want
something that's gonna make me sweat in
my boots i want some work that's going
to challenge me make me go i'm scared of
this roll for all the right reasons and
i can't wait to go attack it and see
what i come and see how i come up the
other side that's what i was looking for
and i wasn't getting that in the
rom-coms so i stopped doing those and 20
months later
the roles that i wanted to do that did
make me do those things came to me
now why do you pursue things that scare
you why seek the role that's hard
because it cost me something
because it
it comes with a price it's a bit of that
line don't pick a fight it's not really
a fight unless you can lose it it's not
really you know don't it's not really a
risk unless you can lose the fight
i feel more alive in them i have an
experience in the making of them i'm
nervous every day i come to work
i feel like when i nail a day and i
knock it i know i did i feel like yes i
ge i have a measure at the end of the
day like you set out to do something you
prepared for it you had intention and
you did it and maybe even became found
some magic in the day that i sleep good
knowing that i accomplished that day in
uh building the architecture of a
character's arc through a story and if i
could put the whole thing together and
it comes out the whole one old
performance turns out to be a beautiful
song an original song of that character
then i'm like yes and i know that i was
highly responsible for that i was not
solely responsible but the most
responsible for that and that gives me
pleasure
that gives me gratification that makes
me feel
gives me significance that gives me
confidence
if i don't pull it off
and i do have a day where i'm like oh no
you did never
and it was my fault i'd still i would
rather with these kind of rolls i can
look in the mirror and go so guess who's
responsible not pulling it off
you conor hey in the same way when i go
guess who's responsible pull pulling up
i like knowing who you and and and and
it was also again work that challenged
the vitality of my life dramatic roles
allow the actor to have as high of a
ceiling or as low of a basement from
love to hate from happiness to pain as
that particular actor wants to bring to
it
that's what's inherently beautiful about
dramas okay you're the part you're
playing the role how does how how is are
you going to emulate that person through
yourself
um
that is a vital thing that i feel that
makes me sweat that makes me sleep
better at the end of the day that gives
me a sense of accomplishment i'm like
yes i did what i intended to do i
prepared for it was ready oh the day
didn't go out i thought it was going to
go but i i called audibles along the way
enrolled and still told the truth on my
man the character that gratification
feels good
i love the concept of having to earn
your saturday which you talk about in
the book
um
my favorite story from the book around
this theme is when you go to africa and
you get into the wrestling match and
they're cheering your name dota i don't
know
your name
um
walk us through that story because the
punchline to that story is is a life
lesson i think for all of us
there's a few punch lines i hope i hit
the right one if i don't just follow me
but it's it's i will happily feedback
your punchline to you if it doesn't come
up
so
i go
this was following
literally following one two the third
time i had this very specific dream
that was
the third time i had it in over eight
years
and the first second time i had it i
went to peru
in this dream i was floating
down the amazon river on my back wrapped
up in anacondas pythons uh piranhas uh
freshwater sharks etc and the left
bank of the river all the way down past
the horizon was lined with african
tribesmen with spears and shields
there's an 11 second dream 11 frames
frame
frame 11. and at the end of it
what
those pictures
look like they would be a nightmare
it was a wet dream
three different times
so
when i had it the second time i said
whoa okay
there's somebody caught there's a
calling here i got to follow this so i
chased down the amazon went to proof now
we get to i have it again
in 99 and i'm like oh geez i guess this
is telling me to go chase down the
second half of my dream now what's the
only other thing i know in the dream
geographically african tribes so i got
to go to africa well i decided to go i
didn't know where to go to africa so i i
one of my favorite musicians was alifaka
toure and i'd been listening to him and
i said oh where is he from nia funke
i get a ticket to bamako hitchhike nine
hours to mop tea
get dropped off meet one guy who speaks
english uh finds a guide i haggle over
dinner and the next day we're on a boat
headed up the niger river to go find ole
we find him four days later after i find
him
four days into my trip
i'm like well now where do we go
i don't know what my existence was that
all of my dream was that was i supposed
to see well my guide is a very wise man
says i believe there's a place that you
will um you will remember the outer it's
called the banjagara we go to the
doggone country we go up in the boat and
we go and we hike many days to the from
village to village
and each village you come to we get to
the uh the
the boundary and the chief come and if
the chief like what you see in your eyes
he raised his hand you give him soft
handshake if you not like what you see
in your eyes we keep walking to next
village to hopefully find chief that
like what you see in your eyes well we
go on this trip it's beautiful we're
hiking 8 to 14 miles a day to these
different tribes sleeping on the roof
each night it's beautiful one day i get
to this place called bijamatu it's a
beautiful
village
in the top of the the mountains there
and it's split there's there's there's a
muslim third
uh there's an animus third and there's a
christian third and they all
live together well i've been hiking all
day it was a 14 mile hike and i'm laying
there like i did when i would arrive
from these hikes i'm stretching on the
ground and
working out the day's kinks and
you know when i would arrive in village
i was sort of the village entertainment
because my skin was light out of beard
who's this traveler so the village
starts to gather around kids and middle
aged people there's about 30 people
gathered around
and
two of these young strapping young
african boys or about 19 start kind of
they do better
and i could tell they were challenging
me i look over at east i said they
challenge me he's like
yes
they they they want to wrestle strong
white men named dauda which is the name
i went under david which became dada and
he goes they say they are the champion
wrestlers of the village
and they challenge
godda to wrestle match
oh here we go my heart speaks so i
decided to stretch this out and all of a
sudden that that conversation is
gathered now about 50 villagers around
all of a sudden while i'm stretching
looking up at the sky thinking about
this challenge
the village starts screaming all
high pitched screaming i look up the two
boys who would challenge me boom run an
opposite way sprinting
and all the villagers are laughing and
going on well why are they laughing
because guess who steps up where the two
boys were right over me
michelle
the real
champion of the village
wrestler
so the two boys were talking noise
saying they were champions when actually
this guy is the real champion tree trunk
legs burlap bag tied around his waist no
shirt
he stands over me points down at me
points to his chest and points over
there as it does this i know that this
is a direct challenge the crowd's going
crazy as my heart starts beating and i'm
going like no f and way
in this year and this year's going are
you kidding me you will regret not
finding out what happened so i get up
stand in front of him point to his chest
point to my chest
look over there and head that way now
what's where am i heading there's a big
dirt pit
the crowd goes crazy now i've here comes
strong white mandala and michelle are
going to have a match we're in the
middle of the ring i don't know what the
rules are i don't know if there's
hitting i don't know if there's biting i
don't know there seemed to be no weapon
so that's good
and but he he he reaches down he grabs
my waist
really turning and looks at me to like
mirror him and i grab him by that waist
he puts his other arm down so he's
holding me by the waist with two hands
and i'm holding him by the way so we're
face to face then he lowers his forehead
and digs it into my collarbone right
here this clavicle right here digs it in
i do the same so now we're ear to ear
holding each other's waist and we're
moving down into this position like two
bulls in the middle of this dirt pit the
chief comes over puts hands on both our
heads and goes dot
crowd goes crazy i
realize that dot means ding ding and we
get going
and
he takes me down i flip him over my back
i get up take him down
we go around and around i get slammed i
slam him he gets me to leg lock i almost
lose my breath and black out i come out
of it get him in a headlock all of a
sudden the chief comes in and splits us
up it's been about probably it felt like
30 minutes probably only been like two
two and a half
we stand up i'm pouring sweat
hyperventilating
i had these talismans that were sowed in
my beard at the time two of them are
ripped out so i've got blood running
down my
neck and chest my knees are bleeding my
ankles are bleeding and again i'm
huffing and puffing now mind you i was
in pretty damn good shape at this time i
just come off this film rain of fire so
i was in pretty good shape but still
michelle was like tree trunk legs and
it's just a sturdy rock
i look at him
not a bead of sweat maybe just a
glistened sweat but he's not happy the
crowd is very happy for some reason
he's not happy he's just stone-faced
looking at me while i'm going
all of a sudden the chief goes dip
round two
ways to waste head down the clavicle
here we go crowd's going ape [__] here
we go bam ding ding we go around again
same thing's going i catapult them over
my head he comes down i come in he leg
locks me again we go from headlocks i
get him in a boston crab he flips me
over
all of a sudden
chief comes in breaks us up
raises both our hands
the crowd is
dizzying now frantically screaming
michelle runs away
now it's just me the crowd starts going
down
down and i'm just engulfed by about 100
of the villagers
well
i go
on that night
very
happy with my day that i accepted the
challenge and wow i think i did pretty
good you know i mean i i sleep that
night i think uh um
i've kind of crossed a cradle of truth
you know i see the the the
northern cross for the first time and
the stars in the sky i wasn't looking
for it it revealed itself laid there
awake saw 29 shooting stars one of those
moments where i really felt like
ta-da i'm in the cradle of truth this is
it i'm really on it which maybe i was
but as i'm thinking this
and feeling so good about myself i'm
really feeling like i am now in tune
with the one
divine one i'm laying there on top
because i'm about to go to sleep that
night
feeling so good about myself so high
about myself
[Laughter]
and i go as i get
my nose blocks up as i'm just about to
go to sleep and i had some mucus in my
nose so i i i sit up
hock up a big
loogie for a better word
and go to launch it off the the roof
i forgot that i had a mosquito net on
[Laughter]
so the looking goes
it just splatters across my face like an
oyster and i remember just starting to
howl and laughter because i was just in
the moment where i was feeling like i am
here the chosen one
that's been a loogie in my own face
so touche
um anyway the next morning we get up to
leave and as we get to the edge of the
uh boundary to that
village on the way to our next 11 mile
hike to the next village guess who's
waiting for me
michelle
doesn't say a word looks me in the eye
and as i cross the boundary to go he
looks at me walks up grabs my hand holds
my hand and walked with me
the 11 miles to the next village we
didn't say a word get to the next
village as soon as i got to the boundary
met the chief got left in he gave me a
slight bow turned around and walked back
home
i go to issa that night my guide he said
let's talk about last night the
wrestling match i mean i think i i i i
did pretty good he's like oh no daddy
you do very very good very very good
everybody believed that michelle's going
to have strong white men named daughter
on his back in 10 seconds
you did very very good he said yeah good
yeah great he goes i go why was everyone
you know so chatting my name and and he
was like
you big man in this village not because
you handled michelle but mainly because
you accept the challenge when you accept
the challenge you big man in this
village but you're also a very good
wrestler doubter i said yeah well you
know i wrestle by two older brothers he
goes
you know michelle
he's not only champion this village
michelle is championed this village and
tree village back
champion wrestler i said oh really he
goes yes now
you come back
we make money
and i went back there
unannounced six years later
michelle had had four kids
hip
no wrestling match
six years later the next morning
after benjimatu when i left to go hike
to the next village 11 miles away guess
who was again
waiting for me at the boundary
who held my hand and walked me the 11
miles without saying a word to the next
village bowed and walked back
michelle
yeah i love that story because it's
about
accepting the challenge right so win or
lose it's like that rocky moment just
going the distance that is what matters
and you know looking at your life and
the way that you've navigated it it's
it's and you really have to read the
book to get how many times over and over
and over you do this um you know nothing
in your life was self-evident or obvious
not like you came from a wealthy family
or a hollywood family you know i mean it
was it was the sort of scrappy way that
you get the job in the bar in the first
place and then obviously earn the
respect to people so they introduce you
to this guy but then you've you know you
know who you are at least at that moment
in your life and so there's that
effortlessness the charm to get it but
then always accepting the the what if
and the big what if of
not taking the work
it could have ended i mean you said you
actually seriously considered going back
and teaching fourth grade or becoming a
high school football coach and so
when people think about matthew
mcconaughey oh yeah i remember he used
to act but now he's a fourth grade
teacher
it
for you to step into that space be like
i i didn't need to leave that space
because i was okay being the high school
teacher or the fourth grade teacher i
didn't need to leave
you know the wrestling match because i
was okay losing the wrestling match
right it's just like accepting those
challenges is why you've survived for so
long in a business that eats people up
faster than the nfl
well
how many times do we think is our first
thought
oh well if i did that if i became that
fourth grade teacher that would be a
demotion or a demotive move in my life
no it wouldn't have been
it would not have been
i'm glad i didn't have to do it now in
hindsight but that would not have been a
demotion
i would have
found certain value
that was going to fill my soul in that
room in that role
that i was not finding doing the work i
was doing in in hollywood so
it would not have been a demotion it may
have been perceived as one
but
i i i look i've got and i've got friends
and trust me i've done it myself
you know that
lose a job and then get another but
won't take it because it's less salary
than maybe the one they had before
and all of a sudden find themselves
three four five six seven eight years a
decade later going they're still stuck
they didn't do anything they're still
saying like no i'm going to find that
thing and i'm going you missed a decade
man
just go do that one that that you love
to do that maybe was going to pay you
less because you'd at least been
building something through the day and
who knows what that would have led to
maybe that would have led to something
where you're getting paid five times
more than you were
doing something else you love even more
uh so a lot of times i say this in the
book sometimes it's not even about what
choice we make just make a choice and
commit to it and go and dive in because
we can look up limbo sucks we're all in
limbo now with covert limbo sucks but
sometimes just go i don't know what to
do i'm just going to do this one i'm
just going to do it if i do this to the
best of my ability
sometimes that lens somebody sees us do
that and they come up and they go you're
actually more qualified you're
overqualified for this job you should be
doing that you're like yeah that's what
i really like to do they'll see it but
put ourselves in a position right
because you can look up and days weeks
months years can go by and you can go
i've been tiptoeing around here not
committing to anything for so damn long
i'm missing out
you talk about us being in limbo right
now and i know your obsession is values
values in your own life values to pass
on to your kids values for us as a
society um to take away and you gave a
commencement speech at your alma mater
that i thought was
awesome and it felt a bit like a dry run
for the book because so many of the
themes carried into green lights
but man really really truly first of all
the book is amazing and i i really mean
that the commencement speech was amazing
some of the the values that you talked
on um i think are so powerful especially
right now
the world isn't fair it's never going to
be life isn't easy don't want it to be
which i thought was really interesting
you're gonna have to earn your way
forward and that we should want it that
way
what are some values whether those or
others that you think people
will get more out of their own life if
they embrace
that there's a responsibility
to freedom and that there is freedom in
responsibility
you know and that earn your way there
we remember the stuff we earn the stuff
we experience more than what the teacher
tells us or what someone gives us for
free
we just do we broke a proverbial sweat
on it whether it's mental or physical or
whatever we we built it we we understand
we felt how we got it how we achieved it
how we got what we wanted
those stick with us whether we forget
them intellectually they were written in
our lineage and they build resilience
and they and and they build
a healthy true optimism going forward to
know that oh no i've worked for
something before and achieved it delayed
gratification
oh there are choices i can make today
for myself that will
pay me back later in life mailbox money
as we call it entertainment industry um
roi
there are specific personal choices we
can make and they're worth considering
look i'm all for hedonism i'm all for
immediate gratification too sometimes
it's like yes dude it's halloween eat
all the candy you want go for it it's
not gonna become a habit day to day
there's certain nights where you're like
hey guys tonight we're gonna blow it out
the walls are padded and we got nothing
we're off work on monday let's go you
know i mean certain times to say that's
okay
but
there's you know i where is the selfish
choice this the selfless choice where is
what we want actually what we need
whether it's what we need actually what
we want
where is the best choice for me the best
choice for we where's the best choice
for we the best choice for me that's the
place
i believe the hunt talk about honey
holes that's the real place to go
forward in trying to find
um tea ourselves up for those green
lights in the future and although i and
i mean the simple things let me bring it
down to a really simple one
you drink coffee
i do
do you
prepare your coffee put it in the filter
and pour the water in the coffee maker
the night before
not for myself but ironically i do for
my wife
because you're teeing her up for what
a green light the next morning correct
so she doesn't have to come in and go
where's that filter she can just come in
and go
press the button you're giving her a
gift to her future self you're making
something easier for her it's a very
simple thing but it's a great little
simple metaphor so there are choices we
make if you're going to say right now
i'm going to lie cheat and steal to get
what i want and i got it
i got an immediate green light
for me
that's a battery-powered green light
that's not a solar-powered green light
why
because now
everywhere i go i gotta look over my
shoulder to see if someone's there that
i lied cheating stole from and when i'm
doing that i'm stealing who's time my
time
now i'm not freedom i'm not free i don't
have the freedom i didn't create freedom
in my future because i chose to be it
make an irresponsible act that i left
crumbs
i've now got reasons to look over my
shoulder and the more things we do to
create in our in our future that we got
to look over our shoulder the more of
our most precious thing we have in our
life's time that we're stealing from
ourselves
so it's not puritanical it's just like
it's actually self-serve it's a very
selfish choice
um
and and i'm a fan of the word selfish
i've read it helped redefine it um but i
believe that there are selfish choices
we can make that are the most self-less
that there are self-less choices that
we can make that are the most selfish
choices those two are not a
contradiction and we see them that way
responsibility of freedom and the
freedom in responsibility life's more
than just straight saturdays with as
much cake as you want to eat it just is
you will see how long you last doing
that
if you really do it you won't last that
long um there we we responsibility is is
appreciation of a past it's building of
a lineage it's investing in ourselves
it's investing in something we started
to build yesterday that we want to take
into tomorrow
there's a response that gives us freedom
so to actually have true freedom we have
to take certain we have to be
responsible more responsible for certain
things for ourselves who we are
constantly investigating and
interrogating our better selves to say
i'm going to be a little bit better at
this tomorrow knowing that we never land
we never we never there's no there's no
ta-da moment
and that is one thing i think we all got
to watch because we all are so result
oriented oh if i keep doing this i'm
going to get to that place of pure
enlightenment i'm going to go tada
[__]
no you don't
can it be a small ascension of evolution
yes
but there's no ta-da moment we're always
chasing
yet and if we can get comfortable and
understand and laugh at and and be ready
to work hard the fact that
we're all just if we could just say
we're all just achieving our way to the
unachievable and that's as good as it
gets
and that's pretty damn awesome
that's the honey hole
that's the third time i've said that in
this talk but i love that word
i love that man would you say that your
book contains the
the bulk of the wisdom that you'd want
to pass on to your kids or is there a
key concept that didn't make the book
that you're trying to instill in them
it's it's definitely in the book it's
not in the book in a form that my kids
12 10 and 7 need to digest it right now
because um
there's just the way that true stories
would raise too many questions where
they may miss the the actual you know
moral of the story you know my my
parents instilled that the first four
times i got in trouble and in my family
grew up as a kid our version of getting
trouble was getting a whooping right was
for not answering to my name
for saying i can't
and
for saying i hate you to my brother and
for lying
there were values instilled in those
four things
those were words that hurt
not the whooping i got
but if i'd have gone through life
answering to whatever name
lying
thinking i can't do stuff instead of
feeling like i was having trouble and
hating
i that would hurt me that would have
hurt me in my future life i would not be
who i am i would that would be those
would be a hurtful way for me to go on
living life to grow into a human and i
think that can apply for for everybody
it's something we try to steal in our
children i remember this great story my
dad um after i'd already learned the
lesson of don't say can't but forgot the
lesson i was doing my going out to do my
chores one saturday morning part of
those were mow the yard we'd eat
crank the lawnmower three times four
times five times five put it on choke oh
god damn it it won't start i go inside i
go dad i can't i can't start the
lawnmower he goes i saw his molars meat
uh oh and i knew right when i said oh i
said that bad word
can't
he didn't say a word he got up slowly
walked out of the bedroom through the
kitchen out of the garage around to the
back shed where the lawn mower was
pulled a few times it didn't start he
leaned down got a screwdriver took
something on fixed this gas leak where
he got the the tube hooked back up so he
was getting gas also he cranks it and
it's running
and he walked over to him he looked at
me he kind of leaned down on on hands on
his front of his knees and looked me in
the eye he goes
you see son
you were just having trouble
beautiful
it was right
sometimes you know
we can't do it ourselves we have trouble
we can seek help someone else can help
us do that so
we we try to instill in our children
that same thing no no no don't say can't
they don't they're not 100 perfect at it
but we're trying to
help them understand why can't and hate
are actually
bad words than [__] [__] damn you know
what i mean they're not good for you
they're not good for your future they
don't though if you live hating and
feeling like you can't do stuff
or lying you're not going to create
green lights in your future for yourself
i love that man it's a perfect perfect
place to tap out
guys if you haven't already go get the
books called green lights it is
phenomenal i highly recommend the audio
version he is amazing in doing all the
different voices and stuff you guys will
love it matthew thank you so much for
joining me and everybody if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
if you always do good work
from your standards
whether you're in a project that fails
or succeeds
you can live with that but if you're
doing things
on other people's
criteria standards and you fail you feel
terrible